[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Once upon a time, there
was a country parson
making his rounds
of the village.
And he stopped at the
cottage of a farmer
and looked over
the fence to where
the farmer was working
in his garden and said,
well, my man, that's a wonderful
job that you and the Lord
have done on that piece of land.
And the farmer
said, yes, reverend,
but you should have seen it
when the Lord had it to himself.
I don't think that farmer
realized that the Lord still
had it to himself.
We think of ourselves
as so separate
from the doings of the Lord
or the doings of nature.
And as a result of this, when
we go to work on the land,
we are apt to force
patterns on it.
As, for example, in
this old Italian print
of a stately garden, where
the plants have practically
grown up on a parade ground
and made to look, shall
we say, as artificial,
as city-like as possible.
This is a garden made
by someone for whom
man was the boss of
nature, and not in nature.
I remember once seeing a cartoon
of a retired Army sergeant
gardener standing by a bed
of tulips, all arranged.
And that he was with his arms
stiff beside him, calling out,
attention!
But in the gardens
of China and Japan,
there is an entirely
different philosophy.
Where the gardener regards
himself, as it were,
as a new plant introduced
into the area, not one,
however, that is rooted to
the ground, a mobile plant,
with an intelligence And he
doesn't regard his intelligence
and his artistry as something
different from those
processes by which
leaves grow, and ferns
achieve their patterns,
and water, its ripples.
He regards his intelligence
as something of the same kind.
And therefore, when
he looks at a piece
of so-called rough
ground, which he
is going to turn into a
garden, the first thing he asks
is not what sort
of a pattern am I
going to impose on
this piece of land?
In other words, he doesn't
move in with a bulldozer
and shovel the mounds
of earth around.
He asks, what would this piece
of land, in collaboration
with me, like to become?
And this is, of course, the
essence of Taoist philosophy,
upon which Zen Buddhism is
founded, a principle which
is also illustrated in the
art of judo, which I shall be
talking about in
the next program.
The principle that the
Taoists call wu-wei,
or non-interference,
which doesn't actually
mean doing nothing in
the face of nature,
doing nothing in
the face of problems
that have to be handled.
But it means, not just taking
the line of least resistance,
but, as it were, finding out
the grain of the situation
and going with it.
And this whole
philosophy of nature,
of man as an integral part of
nature, not separated from it
and dominating it, but
in it and moving with it,
his own intelligence
representing
the same force that moves
in mountains, and stars,
and plants, and trees, is
to build works of art that
are at the same time
works of nature,
rather than works
of artificiality.
Now, one of the most sublime
examples of the Japanese garden
is that of the Katsura
Palace in Kyoto.
And this garden was created
somewhere around 1620 or 1624.
And in these crowded
city areas, the Japanese
have exhibited
the perfect genius
for achieving in a very
small space, the atmosphere
of the vast lakes, and
forests, and mountains.
Creating them in
the city is a kind
of symbolism, too,
of the Zen saying,
if the mind is not overlaid
with wind and waves,
you will always be living among
blue mountains and green trees.
If your true nature has the
creative force of nature
itself, wherever you may
go, you will see fishes
leaping and kites flying.
And so in the densely
crowded cities of Japan,
the gardener and the architect
have together conspired
to use minute spaces to create
the atmosphere of peace,
and solitude, and naturalness.
Of course, this garden here is
a very, very wealthy garden,
attached to an old
imperial palace,
with its great lakes
and spacious landscapes.
But the same thing, of course,
is often done on a tiny scale,
so that you might think
that a space of a few yards
is a day's journey.
Now, the art of the
gardener can very well
be illustrated by a
number of anecdotes
about the old
masters of gardening.
And these were often,
incidentally, masters of what
is called the tea ceremony.
The tea ceremony is a
ritual of drinking tea
in quiet seclusion with friends.
And arises from the
practice of Zen monks,
who a long time ago
used to drink tea
to keep themselves awake during
their long hours of meditation.
One of the famous masters
of the tea ceremony in Japan
was Sen no Rikyu.
And a tea master is a kind
of coordinator of art.
For the tea ceremony
involves not only simply
the drinking of tea, but also
the ceramic and other utensils
connected with it, the building
of the house in which the tea
ceremony is held,
and the construction
of the garden in which
the house is placed.
And so a tea master is a
man who has supervision
of all these various
arts and casts over them
the influence of
his exquisite taste.
Now, when Rikyu was studying
the art of the garden,
his master one day directed
him to sweep the path.
And religiously and
dutifully, he swept it.
And the master said,
not quite good enough.
And so he swept it again.
And the master looked at it and
said, still not good enough.
And so he swept it again.
But the master said,
still not good enough.
Well, said Rikyu, look, I
have swept it three times
and it's perfectly clean.
No, no, that's not the
point, said the master.
And grabbing the branch
of a tree, he shook it
and some leaves
scattered on the path.
That, said the master,
is a clean path.
A similar story is told
about Rikyu himself,
when he attained the full
stature of his mastery.
He was patronized by one of the
great feudal loads of Japan,
the prince Hideyoshi.
And one day,
Hideyoshi came to him
with a golden lacquer bowl
and some plum branches
and asked Rikyu to make an
arrangement, the Japanese art
of ikebana or
flower arrangement.
But what Rikyu did was simply
to knock the blossoms off
to float on the water.
And the pattern
of random blossoms
on the surface of the water,
with the gold light of the bowl
beneath, was a perfect
creation, but done, as it were,
in an accidental way.
This, too, is the spirit of
wu-wei or non-interference
with nature.
Let me give you another
illustration of this,
which is rather fascinating.
It's also a story
connected with Rikyu.
There was a feudal
lord of some kind,
I forget who he was, a
noble, who owned a tea
caddy that he was very proud of.
And it was a ceramic tea caddy.
And he invited Rikyu to
have tea with him one day
and use the caddy.
But Rikyu made no
comment about it.
And so the nobleman
thought, well, it really
isn't a very good one after all.
And he was so angry
that he smashed it.
But a friend of his
procured all the pieces
and had the tea caddy mended.
Now, there's an art of
mending broken ceramics
with molten gold.
And little lines of
molten gold showed
all over the caddy, wherever
the cracks had been,
casting this wonderful network.
And when Rikyu saw that, he
said it was absolutely superb.
And consequently, the
value of this caddy
went up to a phenomenal figure.
Now, this is the art of what the
great modern Japanese painter,
Saburo Hasegawa, called
the controlled accident.
And you see there
is the combination
in the idea of the controlled
accident, the accident being
the spontaneity of
nature, the control
being the contribution of man.
But actually, in the
philosophy of Zen
these two things are not
thought of as different,
as representing
different realms, control
from the realm of
mind and spirit,
and accident from the realm
of matter and brute energy.
They look upon the
two as one energy.
And, therefore, the intelligence
of man working in nature,
simply being a more elaborate
form, a more complex form,
of the same forces
that are, as I
said, shaping the
trees and the ferns.
Now, the Katsura garden,
which I showed you, as I said
was a very elaborate one.
And for my taste, the
extremely simple gardens
that you often find
in Zen monasteries
are still more marvelous.
And there is a particular
gotten in Kyoto,
at a temple called
Daisen-in, which
is a peculiarly magnificent
example of this art.
These are just a few
initial pictures of stone
walks in the neighborhood
of this garden.
And here is a part
of the monastery,
with a monk strolling
through it into the garden.
These gardens are made
primarily of rock and sand.
And you see in this painting of
Sesshu's, which is shown here,
the marvelous feeling
for rocks, which inspired
both the painter
and the gardener.
And here in the
garden of Daisen-in
there is created, as
it were, a stream.
But the stream is made of sand.
And the rocks selected
for it could well
be called living rocks.
I think nothing shows
the absence of alienation
between man and nature
more than the Zen artist
treatment of rocks.
You see, rocks, minerals,
are the part of nature
that we think most dead.
And here they are
shown as most alive.
The art of bonseki, or
the cultivation of rocks,
is a very, very highly regarded
artistic pursuit in Japan.
And the gardener will search
for days and days in mountain
streams and places where
fantastic rocks may
be found and bring
them to the garden.
But once he gets
them to the garden,
he wants to get them accustomed
to their new environment.
And so he goes very carefully
about placing them and getting,
for instance, moss to grow on
them in the way that he wants.
He wouldn't dream, for instance,
of simply getting some moss
and plunking it on a rock.
He will rather put the
rock in a moist place
where moss will form
upon it naturally.
It may take three or four years.
But then when the
moss has grown,
he will remove the rock
to the place in the garden
where he wants it.
So you could almost
say that bonseki
is the art of growing rocks.
The Japanese national anthem
says something like this.
May our Emperor reign a
thousand years-- reign ten
thousand thousand years--
until little stones grow
into mighty rocks,
thick-velveted
with ancient moss.
Now, this attitude
to the inanimate
or to the subintelligent,
as we deign to call nature,
is the key of the whole thing.
I remember a Western story
which illustrates the same point
very well.
There was a competition in
sculpture at the Chicago Art
Institute some years ago.
And the competition consisted in
seeing what the students could
do with a cubic foot
of plaster of Paris.
Now, can you imagine
anything more
uninviting than a
cubic foot of plaster
of Paris, a textureless,
white, flat material?
And the person who
won the competition
looked at this object for
a long time, utterly unable
to decide what it wanted to be.
So finally she picked it up
and flung it on the floor.
And this mashed it up and put
all sorts of cracks through it,
and odd, jagged edges.
Then she looked at it again.
And now because it had some
texture to it, she could feel,
she could look into
it and see what
that plaster block
wanted to become.
It's rather the
same way, perhaps
when you're lying in
bed early in the morning
and roving your eyes
over cracks and blotches
on the ceiling or patterns
in a cretonne curtain.
And you begin to see
figures in them that
were not put there
intentionally.
And in this way,
the rough surface
that has come there
by nature begins
to suggest ideas, which
you take up and develop.
And this faculty, which
we call eidetic vision,
is what the gardener
and the artist,
the rock artist inspired
by Zen, employs.
Now, what about
the dwellings that
are put near these gardens?
Here, too, man does
not put up buildings
which make him look a
stranger in his environment.
The whole art of
Zen is to put up
buildings that look as if
they belonged in their place,
as, for example, this temple,
a Zen temple in Kyoto.
Which, with its thatched
roof and the particular style
of roof architecture, perfectly
fits in with its surroundings.
It doesn't, as we
say, proverbially,
stick out like a sore thumb.
It isn't that man is so, as
it were, humble or masochistic
that he doesn't, as it
were, have the spirit
to assert himself.
His assertion of
himself is subtle,
along the lines of human nature.
And thus, compare this
temple with a stately temple
of the West, piercing the sky,
with stone walls shutting out
the day and the
surrounding country.
Canterbury Cathedral,
where, as a matter of fact,
I lived for many
years, noble, austere,
grand, but nevertheless,
contrary to nature.
Here is the interior
of a temple tea room.
And I want you to particularly
to notice the marvelous
use of emptiness in this
kind of architecture.
Perhaps it isn't
easy to see clearly,
but in the very center of the
picture, there is a pillar.
And that pillar is a tree trunk,
with nothing more than the bark
removed.
It has hardly been
finished in any other way.
So that the twists of
the trunk and the grain
are still there to be seen.
And the feeling for emptiness,
that you find very prominently
in this kind of architecture,
is also a major feature
of Chinese and
Japanese painting,
as in this particular example.
Where you can see that the
summer house and the pine tree,
at the bottom right, are
balanced against the vast area
of space in the top of the
picture and over to the left.
Now, the point of
this use of space
is not that it's
simply background.
I mean if you take a
sheet of white paper
and you draw the figure,
bang in the middle of it,
the rest of the white paper
simply serves as background.
But space in Far Eastern
painting and gardening
is intended to be part of the
composition, not something
as in this Ryoan-ji garden,
which shows off the rocks,
but together with the
rocks constitutes the area.
And this philosophy of space,
again, is connected with Zen.
Because very often in Zen it
is said this universe of form
is fundamentally emptiness
or all things come out
of emptiness.
And this doesn't mean a kind
of philosophy of nihilism,
but the idea that
emptiness is created.
In just the same way when
a small boy is confronted
with a vast, white
wall, he seems
to be drawn irresistibly
to take a piece of charcoal
or something, or a crayon,
and make marks on it.
Nothing is more
fertile than emptiness.
And so you see in these
Japanese interiors,
there is a feeling of
total freedom from clutter.
These houses very largely
dispense with furniture.
They don't have great,
awkward bedsteads, and tables,
and cumbersome things to be
moved around every time one
pulls up one's stakes.
You sleep on the floor,
with quilts thrown down,
that can be rolled up and put
in closets during the day,
and so have your bedroom
space free for other things.
And I think the point of this
is that really you can only
live in such
surroundings with comfort
if you're at peace in yourself.
In other words, you
know now some people,
when they get out in the
spaces of the desert,
they feel uncomfortable.
Or if there's a long period
of silence, many of us
feel positively uncomfortable.
And so in the same way, we
tend to like our living spaces
cluttered, full of
all sorts of things
to distract our
minds and our eyes.
And this is simply symptomatic
of our lack of interior peace.
To be able to live
in such surroundings,
you must be as serene
as these surroundings.
This incidentally shows
the tokonoma or alcove
in a tea room.
This alcove is rather
important because it
is a sort of survival in the
secular house of the altar
space in a Buddhist temple.
And it's of great interest
for the feeling of Zen
that the altar space
is no longer occupied
by a specifically
religious object.
In this particular
tokonoma here, there
is a piece of calligraphy
hanging, of writing.
But very often, the principal
decoration of the tokonoma
will simply be a
flower arrangement.
Flowers instead of an image,
emphasizing the particular Zen
point that when
the master is asked
what is the fundamental
principle of Buddhism,
he may well reply, a
branch of plum blossom.
This is it.
And we see now how this feeling
for the spacious architecture
of Japan, which flows
into its surroundings,
is increasingly being taken
up by American architects.
Houses, particularly on the West
Coast, have for several years
been showing the influence of
Japanese and Chinese design,
but more particularly Japanese.
The increasing
merging of the house
with its surroundings, the
increasing use of empty space.
But there is one respect I think
in which the Western architect
is not quite
understanding the spirit
of Japanese architecture.
And this is because the
culture in which he works
does not quite understand
the spirit too.
Many of our new homes
showing Japanese influence
are just pretty much a roof
covering a living area,
with perhaps some
partitioning for the bathroom.
But there is no privacy in
so many of our modern homes.
We have what we
call togetherness.
That means human beings
treated as sardines
in a can, all lumped together.
And this absence of privacy,
this absence of seclusion
in these great barns,
where the whole family
lives on top of everybody
else, is not at all
in the spirit of Zen.
Notice that the Japanese
house, as I showed it to you,
is full of screens
and partitions.
The whole idea of
creating houses like this,
with gardens like
this in small areas,
with all sorts of screens
dividing areas off,
is to create privacy, and peace,
and an atmosphere of solitude
in a densely populated area.
And so where we use this
kind of architectural feeling
to throw people together,
we're not really
putting them together.
You don't get human people
to cooperate with each other
by throwing them at
each other's heads.
Just in the same way, you
don't get the full development
of human personality by trying
to cultivate personality.
Did you ever hear of anybody
who had true personality, who
got it through taking a
course on how to win friends
and influence people or
how to be a real person?
You never did.
It's rather when you forget
about your personality
and you become interested
in something else,
that you become interesting
to other people.
And so in the same way, it's
when you learn to love solitude
that, paradoxically
it may seen, you're
able the better to
get on with others.
This is an example of what's
sometimes called a paradox.
I simply call it
the backwards law,
which runs all the way through
Taoist and Zen philosophy.
That contrary things come from
actions, unexpected things.
That is to say, when
you would be strong,
very often the best
course is to be weak.
When you would be
powerful, the best course
is often to withdraw.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is NET, National
Educational Television.